Memory model document. (#75790)
dotnet/runtime: docs/design/specs/Memory-model.md

In the course of multiple releases .NET runtime implementations settled around a memory model that is a practical compromise between what can be implemented efficiently on the current hardware, while staying reasonably approachable by the developers. This document rationalizes the invariants provided and expected by the CLR runtime in its current implementation with expectation of that being carried to future releases.

## Alignment
When managed by the .NET runtime, variables of built-in primitive types are *properly aligned* according to the data type size. This applies to both heap and stack allocated memory.

1-byte, 2-byte, 4-byte variables are stored at 1-byte, 2-byte, 4-byte boundary, respectively.
8-byte variables are 8-byte aligned on 64 bit platforms.
Native-sized integer types and pointers have alignment that matches their size on the given platform.

## Atomic memory accesses.
Memory accesses to *properly aligned* data of primitive types are always atomic. The value that is observed is always a result of complete read and write operations.

> Note: since unmanaged pointers and managed references are always aligned to their size on the given platform, accesses of pointers and managed references are atomic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Values of unmanaged pointers are treated as native integer primitive types. Memory accesses to *properly aligned* values of unmanaged pointers are atomic.

 Managed references are always aligned to their size on the given platform and accesses are atomic.
```

## Alignment
When managed by the .NET runtime, variables of built-in primitive types are *properly aligned* according to the data type size. This applies to both heap and stack allocated memory.

1-byte, 2-byte, 4-byte variables are stored at 1-byte, 2-byte, 4-byte boundary, respectively.
8-byte variables are 8-byte aligned on 64 bit platforms.
Native-sized integer types and pointers have alignment that matches their size on the given platform.

## Atomic memory accesses.
Memory accesses to *properly aligned* data of primitive types are always atomic. The value that is observed is always a result of complete read and write operations.

Values of unmanaged pointers are treated as native integer primitive types. Memory accesses to *properly aligned* values of unmanaged pointers are atomic.

Managed references are always aligned to their size on the given platform and accesses are atomic.

> The following methods perform atomic memory accesses regardless of the platform.<br/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following methods perform atomic memory accesses regardless of the platform.
```

- `System.Threading.Interlocked` methods
- `System.Threading.Volatile` methods

> **Example:** `Volatile.Read<double>(ref location)` on a 32 bit platform is atomic, while an ordinary read of `location` mat not be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example:** `Volatile.Read<double>(ref location)` on a 32 bit platform is atomic, while an ordinary read of `location` may not be.
```

> **Example:** `Volatile.Read<double>(ref location)` on a 32 bit platform is atomic, while an ordinary read of `location` mat not be.

Reviewer: The location has to be sufficiently aligned for given platform. For example, it has to be 8-byte aligned on Arm 32-bit.

Author: I think support of `Interlocked` with wider types is the reason why we over-align longs and doubles on ARM32. That makes atomic `Volatile` also possible.  

I am not sure how to word this detail properly. Also - is overalignment a universal requirement? Does Mono overalign?  (I think it would have to, for the same reasons - to support `Interlocked`)

Reviewer: *properly aligned* unless the given architecture does not require it ?

Author: I am not sure if overalignment by itself should be a documented/required feature though. It is just one way to make `Interlocked` work with wider than pointer type, but there could be other ways (like taking a global lock, however crude it could be, it would work).

The subtle point here is that `Volatile` and `Interlocked` will be atomic when location is managed by the runtime. (

Reviewer: > Volatile and Interlocked will be atomic when location is managed by the runtime.

I like this description

Author: Changed to have "when the location of the variable is managed by the runtime."

  Operations with full-fence semantics:
     - `System.Thread.MemoryBarrier`
     - `System.Threading.Interlocked` methods

## C# `volatile` feature.
One common way to introduce volatile memory accesses is by using C# `volatile` language feature. Declaring a field as `volatile` does not have any effect on how .NET runtime treats the field. The decoration works as a hint to the C# compiler itself (and compilers for other .Net languages) to emit reads and writes of such field as  reads and writes with `volatile.` prefix.

## Process-wide barrier
Process-wide barrier has full-fence semantics with an additional guarantee that each thread in the program effectively performs a full fence at arbitrary point synchronized with the process-wide barrier in such a way that effects of writes that precede both barriers are observable by memory operations that follow the barriers.

The actual implementation may vary depending on the platform. For example interrupting the execution of every core in the current process' affinity mask could be a suitable implementation.

## Synchronized methods.

> Methods decoratied with ```MethodImpl(MethodImplOptions.Synchronized)``` attribute have the same memory access semantics as if a lock is acquired at an entrance to the method and released upon leaving the method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Methods decorated with ```MethodImpl(MethodImplOptions.Synchronized)``` attribute have the same memory access semantics as if a lock is acquired at an entrance to the method and released upon leaving the method.
```

The reading thread does not need to perform an acquiring read before accessing the content of an instance since all supported platforms honor ordering of data-dependent reads.

However, the ordering sideeffects of reference assignment should not be used for general ordering purposes because:
-	ordinary reference assignments are still treated as ordinary assignments and could be reordered by the compiler.
-	an optimizing compiler can omit the release semantics if it can prove that the instance is not shared with other threads.

## Instance constructors
CLR does not specify any ordering effects to the instance constructors.

## Static constructors
All side effects of static constructor execution will become observable not later than effects of accessing any member of the type. Other member methods of the type, when invoked, will observe complete results of the type's static constructor execution.

## Hardware considerations

> Currently supported implementations of CLR and system libraries make a few expectations about the hardware memory model. These conditions are present on all supported platforms and transparently passed to the user of the runtime. The future supported platforms will likely support these too as the large body of preexisting software will make it burdensome to break common assumptions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently supported implementations of CLR and system libraries make a few expectations about the hardware memory model. These conditions are present on all supported platforms and transparently passed to the user of the runtime. The future supported platforms will likely support these, too, as the large body of preexisting software will make it burdensome to break common assumptions.
```

That applies even for locations targeted by overlapping aligned reads and writes of different sizes.
**Example:** a read of a 4-byte aligned int32 variable will yield a value that existed prior some write or after some write. It will never be a mix of before/after bytes.

*	The memory is cache-coherent and writes to a single location will be seen by all cores in the same order (multicopy atomic).
**Example:** when the same location is updated with values in ascending order (like 1,2,3,4,...), no observer will see a descending sequence.

*	It may be possible for a thread to see its own writes before they appear to other cores (store buffer forwarding), as long as the single-thread consistency is not violated.

*	The memory managed by the runtime is ordinary memory (not device register file or the like) and the only sideeffects of memory operations are storing and reading of values.

*	It is possible to implement release consistency memory model.
Either the platform defaults to release consistency or stronger (i.e. x64 is TSO, which is stronger), or provides means to implement release consistency via fencing operations.

> *	Memory ordering honors data dependency

Reviewer: Is this hardware only concern? One can imagine software implementing optimizations that violate data ordering dependency as well (for example, some sort of profile-guided speculative reads).

I think this should be lifted out of this section to the general model spec.

Author: Yes. It is conceivable for software optimizations to violate that. The spec should not permit that, so I will move this to a general section. 

If .NET will ever need to run on a platform without data dependency guarantees, we will have to emit appropriate fences at indirect reads or everything will break. 
(I doubt this will actually happen, it looks like it has been settled that it was not a good idea the last time)

In the course of multiple releases .NET runtime implementations settled around a memory model that is a practical compromise between what can be implemented efficiently on the current hardware, while staying reasonably approachable by the developers. This document rationalizes the invariants provided and expected by the .NET runtimes in their current implementation with expectation of that being carried to future releases.

## Alignment
When managed by the .NET runtime, variables of built-in primitive types are *properly aligned* according to the data type size. This applies to both heap and stack allocated memory.

1-byte, 2-byte, 4-byte variables are stored at 1-byte, 2-byte, 4-byte boundary, respectively.
8-byte variables are 8-byte aligned on 64 bit platforms.
Native-sized integer types and pointers have alignment that matches their size on the given platform.

The alignment of fields is not guaranteed when `FieldOffsetAttribute` is used to explicitly adjust field offsets.

> ## Atomic memory accesses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Atomic memory accesses
```
Nit: The section titles should not end with dot. (Multiple places.)

One common way to introduce volatile memory accesses is by using C# `volatile` language feature. Declaring a field as `volatile` does not have any effect on how .NET runtime treats the field. The decoration works as a hint to the C# compiler itself (and compilers for other .Net languages) to emit reads and writes of such field as  reads and writes with `volatile.` prefix.

## Process-wide barrier
Process-wide barrier has full-fence semantics with an additional guarantee that each thread in the program effectively performs a full fence at arbitrary point synchronized with the process-wide barrier in such a way that effects of writes that precede both barriers are observable by memory operations that follow the barriers.

The actual implementation may vary depending on the platform. For example interrupting the execution of every core in the current process' affinity mask could be a suitable implementation.

## Synchronized methods.
Methods decorated with ```MethodImpl(MethodImplOptions.Synchronized)``` attribute have the same memory access semantics as if a lock is acquired at an entrance to the method and released upon leaving the method.

## Data-dependent reads are ordered.

> In all implementations of .NET runtime, memory ordering honors data dependency. When performing indirect reads from a location derived from a reference, it is guaranteed that reading of the data will not happen ahead of obtaining the reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Memory ordering honors data dependency. When performing indirect reads from a location derived from a reference, it is guaranteed that reading of the data will not happen ahead of obtaining the reference.
```
We do not start other sections with `In all implementations of .NET runtime` either.

# .NET memory model

## ECMA 335 vs. .NET memory models
ECMA 335 standard defines a very weak memory model. After two decades the desire to have a flexible model did not result in considerable benefits due to hardware being more strict. On the other hand programming against ECMA model requires extra complexity to handle scenarios that are hard to comprehend and not possible to test.

In the course of multiple releases .NET runtime implementations settled around a memory model that is a practical compromise between what can be implemented efficiently on the current hardware, while staying reasonably approachable by the developers. This document rationalizes the invariants provided and expected by the .NET runtimes in their current implementation with expectation of that being carried to future releases.

## Alignment
When managed by the .NET runtime, variables of built-in primitive types are *properly aligned* according to the data type size. This applies to both heap and stack allocated memory.

1-byte, 2-byte, 4-byte variables are stored at 1-byte, 2-byte, 4-byte boundary, respectively.

> 8-byte variables are 8-byte aligned on 64 bit platforms.

Reviewer 3: Do you want to make a statement about larger SIMD types? (128 bit, 256 bit, 512 bit, possibly Arm SVE variable-sized vectors)

Author: I do not think SIMD types guarantee anything in terms of atomicity or ordering of accesses, so it does not seem worth mentioning them.

Native-sized integer types and pointers have alignment that matches their size on the given platform.

The alignment of fields is not guaranteed when `FieldOffsetAttribute` is used to explicitly adjust field offsets.

## Atomic memory accesses

> Memory accesses to *properly aligned* data of primitive types are always atomic. The value that is observed is always a result of complete read and write operations.

Reviewer 4: > primitive types

It may be useful to define this set precisely (<=> refer to an existing definition). Does it include enums?

Values of unmanaged pointers are treated as native integer primitive types. Memory accesses to *properly aligned* values of unmanaged pointers are atomic.

Managed references are always aligned to their size on the given platform and accesses are atomic.

The following methods perform atomic memory accesses regardless of the platform when the location of the variable is managed by the runtime.
- `System.Threading.Interlocked` methods
- `System.Threading.Volatile` methods

**Example:** `Volatile.Read<double>(ref location)` on a 32 bit platform is atomic, while an ordinary read of `location` may not be.

## Unmanaged memory access
As unmanaged pointers can point to any addressable memory, operations with such pointers may violate guarantees provided by the runtime and expose undefined or platform-specific behavior.

> **Example:** memory accesses through pointers which are *not properly aligned* may be not atomic or cause faults depending on the platform and hardware configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Example:** memory accesses through pointers whose target address is *not properly aligned* to the data access size may be not atomic or cause faults depending on the platform and hardware configuration.
```

Although rare, unaligned access is a realistic scenario and thus there is some limited support for unaligned memory accesses, such as:
* `unaligned.` IL prefix
* `Unsafe.ReadUnaligned`, `Unsafe.WriteUnaligned` and ` Unsafe.CopyBlockUnaligned` helpers.

These facilities ensure fault-free access to potentially unaligned locations, but do not ensure atomicity.

As of this writing there is no specific support for operating with incoherent memory, device memory or similar. Passing non-ordinary memory to the runtime by the means of pointer operations or native interop results in Undefined Behavior.

## Side-effects and optimizations of memory accesses

> .NET runtime assumes that the side-effects of memory reads and writes include only changing and observing values at specified memory locations. This applies to all reads and writes - volatile or not. **This is different from ECMA model.**

Reviewer 3: Would it be useful to describe *how* this model differs from ECMA, or does it not matter?

Author: For the most part this piece **is** the general difference from ECMA. 
Other details just follow. For example, once you assume that reading from the shared memory observes the value as the sideeffect, it follows that compiler cannot redo the read as that could see a different value. 
ECMA permits read duplication if the read is not volatile. 

The goal is to describe and demystify the current model. I am mentioning that this part is intentionally different from ECMA to resolve possible questions from people familiar with ECMA, but I do not think it is necessary to describe differences in detail. That might just make the document more confusing.

> .NET runtime assumes that the side-effects of memory reads and writes include only changing and observing values at specified memory locations. This applies to all reads and writes - volatile or not. **This is different from ECMA model.**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.NET runtime assumes that the side-effects of memory reads and writes include only observing and changing values at specified memory locations. This applies to all reads and writes - volatile or not. **This is different from ECMA model.**
```

As a consequence:
* Speculative writes are not allowed.

> * Reads cannot be introduced.

Author: These are basically the rules that we define as a matter of codifying the model that existed for many years. 
I think that is important to have precise but not overly verbose rules.
I wonder how this can be clearer besides saying "we can`t introduce or remove observable sideeffects", which is kind of circular. Perhaps I can add some explanation what these rules try to achieve:

- A read cannot be re-done, since it could fetch a different value and introduce a race that the program did not have. 

- On the other hand, if the value was not used, it is the same as not doing the read at all (same sideeffects), so unused reads can be removed.

- Coalescing of adjacent ordinary memory accesses is ok, since it is generally ok to _remove_ races. 

- We can't allow speculative writes as we consider changing the value to be generally observable, thus effects of a speculative write may not be possible to undo.

## C# `volatile` feature
One common way to introduce volatile memory accesses is by using C# `volatile` language feature. Declaring a field as `volatile` does not have any effect on how .NET runtime treats the field. The decoration works as a hint to the C# compiler itself (and compilers for other .Net languages) to emit reads and writes of such field as  reads and writes with `volatile.` prefix.

## Process-wide barrier
Process-wide barrier has full-fence semantics with an additional guarantee that each thread in the program effectively performs a full fence at arbitrary point synchronized with the process-wide barrier in such a way that effects of writes that precede both barriers are observable by memory operations that follow the barriers.

The actual implementation may vary depending on the platform. For example interrupting the execution of every core in the current process' affinity mask could be a suitable implementation.

## Synchronized methods
Methods decorated with ```MethodImpl(MethodImplOptions.Synchronized)``` attribute have the same memory access semantics as if a lock is acquired at an entrance to the method and released upon leaving the method.

> ## Data-dependent reads are ordered

Author: The way specifying the data dependency in th ehardware:

- for reads we do not need to do anything. on all supported platforms dependent reads are ordered. (val = X.Y)
if a value from location X was used to compute address Y, reading from Y cannot happen earlier than reading from X; i.e. we cannot get a cached value of a field that is older than the value of the instance. Note - it is ok if both were cached long time ago, as long as value of Y is not older than X.

Compiler will typically not violate this, since it would not know how to read Y without reading X. However with some prefetching, or profile guided optimization, it might in theory be possible to "know" the location of Y and read it directly (not via X), so we forbid such optimizations in this doc.

- for writes we need to use a release store. On x64 all stores are releases, but on ARM64 we need to use STLR, which ensures that results of the store will not be observable earlier than any memory operation that precedes it (in program order).

```
x.a = val1;
x.b = a;
// we emit STLR here, effects of all memory operations above will become observable no later than the write below.
nonlocal = x; 
```

I think we need to forbid compiler optimizations that violate such guarantee. Otherwise there is no point to instruct the hardware to do the ordering.

```
x.y = val;
nonlocal = x;
```

the following emit should be invalid
```
nonlocal = x;
x.y = val;
```

Just saying "nonlocal writes cannot reorder" would prevent reordering of unrelated writes, which seems a bit too strict.

```
nonlocal1 = val1;
nonlocal2 = val2;
```
should be, in theory, ok to emit as: 
```
nonlocal2 = val2;
nonlocal1 = val1;
```

In a case of complex aliasing, compiler could just behave conservatively and keep the program order of writes, if the writes are not local and not known to be "unrelated".

I am just not sure how to nicely define "related"  -  reachable through an indirection, through a dependent read?

> ## Data-dependent reads are ordered

Reviewer 5: Not sure about all this. I suspect the jit will not do store reordering today, but I can't say for sure.

Dead stores may also be a problem, say we have
```
x.y = val
nonlocal = x
x.y = val1
```
and the jit can prove `nonlocal` and `x` don't alias, I think it may remove the first store as dead. But maybe this only happens when `x` is known to be a stack location.

In the "transitive case"
```
x.y = val
nonlocal = z  // root of some object graph that reaches x
```
presumably `x` has already been "exposed" in some way?

> ## Data-dependent reads are ordered

Author: ```
x.y = val
nonlocal = x
x.y = val1
```

Removing the first write should be illegal in this case. If `x.y` starts as `null` and `nonlocal = x` is the first publish, the reader might expect that `nonlocal?.y.ToString()` will not throw NRE.

The following seems ok:

```
x.y = val
x.y = val1
nonlocal = x
```

```
x.y = val1
nonlocal = x
```

If publishing is a release, it cannot allow preceding memory operations to be delayed after it, but it would be ok for the operations after it to move earlier.

If we instruct the hardware do a release, I think the compiler should follow the same rules.

Perhaps we can just document it as something like - "for the purpose of compiler optimizations nonlocal object writes should be treated as releases".  

We may not always emit the assignment as an actual release. For example when assigning a frozen/preallocated string literal, we do not need a release in hardware, since the string is immutable and is guaranteed to be completely formed, but we still must preserve the order of writes in compiler optimizations.

> Memory ordering honors data dependency. When performing indirect reads from a location derived from a reference, it is guaranteed that reading of the data will not happen ahead of obtaining the reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Memory ordering honors data dependency. When performing indirect reads from a location derived from a reference, it is guaranteed that reading of the data will not happen ahead of obtaining the reference. This guarantee applies to both managed references and unmanaged pointers.
```

Author: > This guarantee applies to both managed references and unmanaged pointers.

On one side this will require using dependency fences in unmanaged indirect reads if we see another Alpha-like CPU.
On another hand, it is highly unlikely to happen, so we could as well just spec it :-)

**Example:** reading a field, will not use a cached value fetched from the location of the field prior obtaining a reference to the instance.

> ## Object assignment

Reviewer 6: Is this essentially the opposite of data-dependent reads, or is it more subtle?

Reviewer 6: Is this -any- write to the object's fields?

```
obj.field
static = obj
```
is clearly covered, but what about
```
// obj1 and obj2 (may) alias
obj1.field
static = obj2
```

Reviewer 6: Is this code guaranteed to commit all of the updates at the final store?
```
obj1.field = obj2
obj2.field = value
static = obj1
```
(Is "reachable through the instance reference" direct or transitive?)

Author: Yes, it is essentially the opposite of data-dependent reads. Object writes must be emitted as releases, so that one could, for example, traverse a published linked list.

Author: Indirectly it means that compiler cannot reorder data-dependent writes. 
I.E. we cannot emit 

```cs
obj1.field = obj2
static = obj1
obj2.field = value
```

I do not think JIT violates this, but I wonder if this already follows from existing rules or we need to add some constraint on reordering of writes?

Object assignment to a location potentially accessible by other threads is a release with respect to write operations to the instance’s fields and metadata.
The motivation is to ensure that storing an object reference to shared memory acts as a "committing point" to all modifications that are reachable through the instance reference. It also guarantees that a freshly allocated instance is valid (i.e. method table and necessary flags are set) when other threads, including background GC threads are able to access the instance.
The reading thread does not need to perform an acquiring read before accessing the content of an instance since runtime guarantees ordering of data-dependent reads.

However, the ordering sideeffects of reference assignment should not be used for general ordering purposes because:

> -	ordinary reference assignments are still treated as ordinary assignments and could be reordered by the compiler.

Reviewer 6: just verifying - this is referring to unrelated assignments, correct?  As in, a store being a release for some writes -doesn't- imply that it is a store for all writes.

Author: Yes. I think we should reserve a right to reorder unrelated assignments.

-	an optimizing compiler can omit the release semantics if it can prove that the instance is not shared with other threads.

There was a lot of ambiguity around the guarantees provided by object assignments. Going forward the runtimes will only provide the guarantees described in this document.

## Instance constructors
.NET runtime does not specify any ordering effects to the instance constructors.

## Static constructors

> All side effects of static constructor execution will become observable not later than effects of accessing any member of the type. Other member methods of the type, when invoked, will observe complete results of the type's static constructor execution.

Reviewer 2: I believe it is possible to run a static method while the static constructor is still running. In that sense this statement is not correct:

> All side effects of static constructor execution will become observable not later than effects of accessing any member of the type.

A little spelling error: "than effects" => "than the effects". This error was found by the Grammarly browser extension (free). Might be worth using on this document.

## Hardware considerations
Currently supported implementations of .NET runtime and system libraries make a few expectations about the hardware memory model. These conditions are present on all supported platforms and transparently passed to the user of the runtime. The future supported platforms will likely support these as well because the large body of preexisting software will make it burdensome to break common assumptions.

* Naturally aligned reads and writes with sizes up to the platform pointer size are atomic.
That applies even for locations targeted by overlapping aligned reads and writes of different sizes.

> **Example:** a read of a 4-byte aligned int32 variable will yield a value that existed prior some write or after some write. It will never be a mix of before/after bytes.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
**Example:** a read of a 4-byte aligned int32 variable will yield a value that existed prior to some write or after some write. It will never be a mix of before/after bytes.
```

*	The memory is cache-coherent and writes to a single location will be seen by all cores in the same order (multicopy atomic).

> **Example:** when the same location is updated with values in ascending order (like 1,2,3,4,...), no observer will see a descending sequence.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
**Example:** when the same location is updated with values in ascending order (for example, 1,2,3,4,...), no observer will see a descending sequence.
```

*	It may be possible for a thread to see its own writes before they appear to other cores (store buffer forwarding), as long as the single-thread consistency is not violated.

> *	The memory managed by the runtime is ordinary memory (not device register file or the like) and the only sideeffects of memory operations are storing and reading of values.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
*	The memory managed by the runtime is ordinary memory (not device register file or the like) and the only side-effects of memory operations are storing and reading of values.
```

*	It is possible to implement release consistency memory model.

> Either the platform defaults to release consistency or stronger (i.e. x64 is TSO, which is stronger), or provides means to implement release consistency via fencing operations.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Either the platform defaults to release consistency or stronger (that is, x64 is TSO, which is stronger), or provides means to implement release consistency via fencing operations.
```

{
    private static Singleton _inst;

    private Singleton() { }

    public static Singleton GetInstance()
    {
        Singleton localInst = _inst;
        if (localInst == null)
        {
            // unlike the example with the lock, we may construct multiple instances
            // only one will "win" and become a unique singleton object
            Interlocked.CompareExchange(ref _inst, new Singleton(), null);

            // since Interlocked.CompareExchange is a full fence,
            // we cannot possibly read null or some other spurious instance that is not the singleton
            localInst = _inst;
        }

        return localInst;
    }
}
```

* Communicating with another thread by checking a flag

```cs
internal class Program
{
    static bool flag;

    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        Task.Run(() => flag = true);

        // the repeated read will eventually see that the value of 'flag' has changed,
        // but the read must be Volatile to ensure all reads are not coalesced
        // into one read prior entering the while loop.
        while (!Volatile.Read(ref flag))
        {
        }

        System.Console.WriteLine("done");
    }
}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

8-byte variables are 8-byte aligned on 64 bit platforms.
Native-sized integer types and pointers have alignment that matches their size on the given platform.

The alignment of fields is not guaranteed when `FieldOffsetAttribute` is used to explicitly adjust field offsets.

## Atomic memory accesses
Memory accesses to *properly aligned* data of primitive and Enum types with size with sizes up to the platform pointer size are always atomic. The value that is observed is always a result of complete read and write operations.

Primitive types: bool, char, int8, uint8, int16, uint16, int32, uint32, int64, uint64, float32, float64, native int, native unsigned int.

Values of unmanaged pointers are treated as native integer primitive types. Memory accesses to *properly aligned* values of unmanaged pointers are atomic.

Managed references are always aligned to their size on the given platform and accesses are atomic.

The following methods perform atomic memory accesses regardless of the platform when the location of the variable is managed by the runtime.
- `System.Threading.Interlocked` methods
- `System.Threading.Volatile` methods

> **Example:** `Volatile.Read<double>(ref location)` on a 32 bit platform is atomic, while an ordinary read of `location` may not be.

Reviewer 8: @VSadov does this section guarantee that e.g. `Volatile.Read<long>(ref location)` is atomic on 32bit? Because JIT doesn't do that currently, e.g.:
```csharp
long Foo(ref long location) => Volatile.Read(ref location);
```
arm32 codegen:
```asm
000002  6808           ldr     r0, [r1]
000004  F3BF 8F5F      dmb     15
000008  6849           ldr     r1, [r1+0x04]
00000A  F3BF 8F5F      dmb     15
```
we _probably can_ fix it actually via simd(fpu on x64) if it's needed.

Reviewer 9: The official docs have stated that guarantee for a long time, and there's definitely code that relies on it.

Reviewer 8: Filed https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/81999

Reviewer: > arm32 codegen

Is this actual codegen on arm32, or is it disasm produced via non-full fidelity codegen (aljit, pmi, etc.)? I do not see how we can end up with this codegen on arm32.

> we probably can fix it actually via simd(fpu on x64) if it's needed

I do not think that 64-bit simd or floating point operations on x86 and arm32 guarantee atomicity.

The BCL implementation provides this invariant by using 64-bit Interlocked operation for 32-bit: https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/libraries/System.Private.CoreLib/src/System/Threading/Volatile.cs#L95

And the VM intrinsic expansion of the 64-bit volatile methods is disabled for 32-bit targets: https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/coreclr/vm/jitinterface.cpp#L7064-L7066

Reviewer 8: Thanks, sorry for wasted time -I should have tested it on a real 32bit jit instead

The motivation is to ensure that storing an object reference to shared memory acts as a "committing point" to all modifications that are reachable through the instance reference. It also guarantees that a freshly allocated instance is valid (for example, method table and necessary flags are set) when other threads, including background GC threads are able to access the instance.
The reading thread does not need to perform an acquiring read before accessing the content of an instance since runtime guarantees ordering of data-dependent reads.

The ordering side-effects of reference assignment should not be used for general ordering purposes because:
-	independent nonvolatile reference assignments could be reordered by the compiler.
-	an optimizing compiler can omit the release semantics if it can prove that the instance is not shared with other threads.

There was a lot of ambiguity around the guarantees provided by object assignments. Going forward the runtimes will only provide the guarantees described in this document.

> _It is believed that compiler optimizations do not violate the ordering guarantees in sections about [data-dependent reads](~#data-dependent-reads-are-ordered) and [object assignments](~#object-assignment), but further investigations are needed to ensure compliance or to fix possible violations. That is tracked by the following issue:_ https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/79764

Reviewer 10: The given links lead to HTTP 404.
```
https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/design/specs/~
```
Is the resulting url.
